[Docs][Spark] Document schema evolution for INSERT operations (#6967)
delta-io/delta: docs/src/content/docs/delta-batch.mdx

#### Add columns

Columns that are present in the source data but missing from the table are automatically added as part of a write transaction when schema evolution is enabled. Enable schema evolution using one of the following methods:

> - **Use `INSERT WITH SCHEMA EVOLUTION` syntax**: Works with SQL `INSERT` statements. Include `WITH SCHEMA EVOLUTION` in the SQL syntax.

Reviewer: Can you also document `.withSchemaEvolution()`, which is also available in Spark 4.2 / Delta 4.3: https://github.com/apache/spark/pull/55446.

We should make it a bit clearer what's available in which version, e.g.:

Delta 4.3 and above:
Recommend using WITH SCHEMA EVOLUTION / .withSchemaEvolution() with example. Essentially collapse the two sections 'Schema evolution syntax for INSERT' and 'INSERT with schema evolution using DataFrame API' into a single one with shared example (SDL/Dataframe) and pull it up, so that you lead with a clear, simple example of how things work

Then below:
Alternatives (available in all delta versions): mergeSchema & session-level conf, with examples

E.p., this bullet list of all the ways schema evolution can be enabled disappears and the info gets spread in each section

Author: Done. Collapsed the SQL and DataFrame sections into a single recommended "Enable schema evolution (Delta Lake 4.3 and above)" section with a shared SQL/Python/Scala example, leading with `INSERT WITH SCHEMA EVOLUTION` and the new `.withSchemaEvolution()` writer API (apache/spark#55446). Removed the all-the-ways bullet list and split the rest into an "earlier versions" alternatives section (mergeSchema + legacy session conf), with version notes.

- **Set the `mergeSchema` option**: Works with batch writes or streaming writes. Set `.option("mergeSchema", "true")` on individual `write` or `writeStream` operations.
- **Set the Spark configuration (legacy)**: Sets `spark.databricks.delta.schema.autoMerge.enabled` to `true` for the entire `SparkSession`. Not recommended, because session-wide configuration can lead to unintended schema changes across multiple operations.

> When both the `mergeSchema` option and the Spark configuration are specified, the option from the `DataFrameWriter` takes precedence. The added columns are appended to the end of the struct they are present in. Case is preserved when appending a new column.

Reviewer: Reword this to note that both operation confs (mergeSchema and WITH SCHEMA EVOLUTION) take precedence over the session level conf

Author: Reworded: the precedence note now states that operation-level settings (the `mergeSchema` option or `WITH SCHEMA EVOLUTION` / `.withSchemaEvolution()`) take precedence over the session-wide Spark configuration.

    )
    ```

  </TabItem>
  <TabItem label="Scala">

    ```scala
    spark.read
      .table("source_table")
      .write
      .option("mergeSchema", "true")
      .mode("append")
      .saveAsTable("target_table")
    ```

  </TabItem>
</Tabs>

#### Enable schema evolution with Spark configuration (legacy)

You can set the Spark configuration `spark.databricks.delta.schema.autoMerge.enabled` to `true` to enable schema evolution for all write operations in the current `SparkSession`:

<Tabs syncKey="code-examples">
  <TabItem label="Python" active>

    ```python
    spark.conf.set("spark.databricks.delta.schema.autoMerge.enabled", True)
    ```

  </TabItem>
  <TabItem label="Scala">

    ```scala
    spark.conf.set("spark.databricks.delta.schema.autoMerge.enabled", true)
    ```

  </TabItem>
  <TabItem label="SQL">

    ```sql
    SET spark.databricks.delta.schema.autoMerge.enabled=true
    ```

  </TabItem>
</Tabs>

<Aside type="caution" title="Important">
  This approach is not recommended. Instead, enable schema evolution for each write operation:

  - For `INSERT` and batch/streaming writes, use `.option("mergeSchema", "true")` or `INSERT WITH SCHEMA EVOLUTION`

>   - For `MERGE` statements, use `MERGE WITH SCHEMA EVOLUTION`

Reviewer: Remove, this page is only about INSERT
```suggestion
```

Author: Removed the `MERGE WITH SCHEMA EVOLUTION` bullet; this section now only references INSERT/writes.

#### Add columns

> Columns that are present in the source data but missing from the table are automatically added as part of a write transaction when schema evolution is enabled. The added columns are appended to the end of the struct they are present in. Case is preserved when appending a new column.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Columns present in the source data but missing from the table are automatically added during a write transaction when schema evolution is enabled. The added columns are appended to the end of the struct they are present in. The case is preserved when a new column is appended.
```

##### Enable schema evolution (Delta Lake 4.3 and above)

> Use `WITH SCHEMA EVOLUTION` in a SQL `INSERT` statement or `.withSchemaEvolution()` in the DataFrame API to enable automatic schema evolution for a single operation. When enabled, the schema of the target Delta Lake table is automatically updated to accommodate additional columns or widened types of the source data. For a list of the supported type changes, see [Supported type changes](https://docs.delta.io/delta-type-widening/). For example:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
On Delta Lake 4.3 and above, use `WITH SCHEMA EVOLUTION` in a SQL `INSERT` statement or `.withSchemaEvolution()` in the DataFrame API to enable automatic schema evolution for a single operation. When enabled, the schema of the target Delta Lake table is automatically updated to accommodate additional columns or widened types of the source data. For a list of the supported type changes, see [Supported type changes](https://docs.delta.io/delta-type-widening/). For example:
```

<Tabs syncKey="code-examples">
  <TabItem label="SQL" active>

    ```sql
    INSERT WITH SCHEMA EVOLUTION INTO target_table
    SELECT * FROM source_table
    ```

  </TabItem>
  <TabItem label="Python">

    ```python
    (spark.read
      .table("source_table")
      .write
      .mode("append")
      .withSchemaEvolution()
      .saveAsTable("target_table")
    )
    ```

  </TabItem>
  <TabItem label="Scala">

    ```scala
    spark.read
      .table("source_table")
      .write
      .mode("append")
      .withSchemaEvolution()
      .saveAsTable("target_table")
    ```

  </TabItem>
</Tabs>

If the source data contains columns that don't exist in the target table, those columns are automatically added to the `target_table` schema. Existing rows receive `NULL` values for the new columns.

<Aside type="note">
  `WITH SCHEMA EVOLUTION` and `.withSchemaEvolution()` are available in Delta Lake 4.3 and above.
</Aside>

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

Reviewer 2: repeated info

<Tabs syncKey="code-examples">
  <TabItem label="Python" active>

    ```python
    (spark.read
      .table("source_table")
      .write
      .option("mergeSchema", "true")
      .mode("append")
      .saveAsTable("target_table")
    )
    ```

  </TabItem>
  <TabItem label="Scala">

    ```scala
    spark.read
      .table("source_table")
      .write
      .option("mergeSchema", "true")
      .mode("append")
      .saveAsTable("target_table")
    ```

  </TabItem>
</Tabs>

Alternatively, set the Spark configuration `spark.databricks.delta.schema.autoMerge.enabled` to `true` to enable schema evolution for all write operations in the current `SparkSession`:

<Tabs syncKey="code-examples">
  <TabItem label="Python" active>

    ```python
    spark.conf.set("spark.databricks.delta.schema.autoMerge.enabled", True)
    ```

  </TabItem>
  <TabItem label="Scala">

    ```scala
    spark.conf.set("spark.databricks.delta.schema.autoMerge.enabled", true)
    ```

  </TabItem>
  <TabItem label="SQL">

    ```sql
    SET spark.databricks.delta.schema.autoMerge.enabled=true
    ```

  </TabItem>
</Tabs>

<Aside type="caution" title="Important">

>   Enabling schema evolution session-wide is not recommended, because it can lead to unintended schema changes across multiple operations and makes it harder to reason about which operations evolve the schema. Instead, enable schema evolution for each individual operation using `WITH SCHEMA EVOLUTION`, `.withSchemaEvolution()`, or the `mergeSchema` option.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  Enabling schema evolution session-wide is not recommended because it can lead to unintended schema changes across multiple operations and makes it harder to reason about which operations evolve the schema. Instead, enable schema evolution for each individual operation using `WITH SCHEMA EVOLUTION`, `.withSchemaEvolution()`, or the `mergeSchema` option.
```
